JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
REX TILLERSON, U.S. Secretary of
State: They
have aligned themselves with an
unreliable
partner in Bashar al-Assad.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Secretary of
State Rex Tillerson
talks tough, warning Russia
about backing
the Assad regime in the wake of
chemical weapons
attacks.
Then:
JEFF SESSIONS, U.S. Attorney
General: For
those that continue to seek
improper and illegal
entry into this country, be
forewarned.
This is a new era.
JUDY WOODRUFF: As Attorney
General Jeff Sessions
tours the U.S.-Mexico border, we
head to Mexico
City, where the recently
deported struggle
to survive in unfamiliar
surroundings.
FELIZIO GONZALES, Recently
Deported (through
translator): I had a girlfriend
I was living
with, but now it's all over.
She stayed there, and I came
back to Mexico.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And a forgotten
generation.
The challenges of educating
Syrian children
in the middle of war.
All that and more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: President Trump's
top diplomat
is now in Russia at a moment of
high tension.
It centers on last week's U.S.
military strike
on Syria, after the regime
launched a chemical
weapons attack against its own
people.
Chief foreign affairs
correspondent Margaret
Warner reports on this day's
events.
MARGARET WARNER: Secretary of
State Rex Tillerson
arrived in Moscow this evening
on the heels
of some tough talk about Syria
at the Group
of 7 meeting in Italy.
REX TILLERSON, U.S. Secretary of
State: Russia
has really aligned itself with
the Assad regime,
the Iranians and Hezbollah.
Is that a long-term alliance
that serves Russia's
interest?
Or would Russia prefer to
realign with the
United States, with other
Western countries
and Middle East countries who
are seeking
to resolve the Syrian crisis?
MARGARET WARNER: U.S.-Russian
tensions surged
after last Tuesday's chemical
attack, which
killed more than 80 people in
Syria's rebel-held
Idlib province.
The U.S. responded with cruise
missile strikes
on a Syrian air base Thursday.
Tillerson again today faulted
Russia for failing
to enforce a deal it helped
negotiate in 2013
to rid Syria of all chemical
weapons.
In their communique today, the
G7 ministers
said they were shocked and
horrified by the
attack, but they decided against
further actions
for now.
Speaking in Moscow, Russian
President Vladimir
Putin likened the allegations
about Syria
to false U.S. claims in 2003
that Iraq had
weapons of mass destruction.
He said he expects more such
incidents.
VLADIMIR PUTIN, Russian
President (through
translator): We have
intelligence from various
sources that similar
provocations are being
prepared in other regions of
Syria, including
the southern suburbs of
Damascus, where they
are planning to plant chemicals
and blame
the Syrian government for using
them.
MARGARET WARNER: Hours later,
White House
officials accused Moscow of
attempting to
cover up Syria's culpability
with -- quote
-- "false narratives."
They said satellite and open
source imagery
establishes Syria was
responsible, and disproves
Russia's claims that the gas was
released
by a government strike on a
rebel depot.
A senior U.S. official had said
Monday there's
evidence Russia knew ahead of
time about the
chemical attack, but White House
Press Secretary
Sean Spicer walked that back
today.
SEAN SPICER, White House Press
Secretary:
There's no consensus within the
intelligence
community that there was
involvement.
MARGARET WARNER: At the same
time, Spicer's
own words proved a distraction
for the White
House.
SEAN SPICER: We didn't use
chemical weapons
in World War II.
You know, you had a -- you know,
someone as
despicable of Hitler who didn't
even sink
to the -- to using chemical
weapons.
MARGARET WARNER: When
challenged, he acknowledged
that Hitler gassed millions of
Jews and others
in death camps.
And Spicer later clarified his
remarks in
a statement, saying he was in no
way trying
to minimize the Holocaust.
Meantime, at the Pentagon,
Defense Secretary
James Mattis and Central
Command's top general,
Joseph Votel, reiterated that
the U.S. focus
would be the fight against ISIS.
Mattis was asked why the U.S.
acted after
the chemical attack, but not
after conventional
strikes that kill Syrian
civilians.
JAMES MATTIS, U.S. Secretary of
Defense: There
is a limit, I think, to what we
can do.
We knew that we could not stand
passive on
this, but it was not a statement
that we could
enter full-fledged, full-bore
into the most
complex civil war probably
raging on the planet.
MARGARET WARNER: For the "PBS
NewsHour," I'm
Margaret Warner.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In the day's
other news, North
Korea issued a fiery new warning
to the United
States.
State TV threatened nuclear
strikes on American
military bases in South Korea
and elsewhere,
if the U.S. makes any aggressive
move.
The report noted that a U.S.
aircraft carrier
group is moving toward the
region for military
exercises with the South.
WOMAN (through translator): The
United States'
dispatching of its nuclear
carrier task group
in the waters off the peninsula
proves that
its reckless moves for invading
North Korea
have reached a serious phase.
If the U.S. dares opt for
military action,
then North Korea is ready to
react to any
mode of war desired by the U.S.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Meanwhile,
President Trump
used Twitter to send his own
warning to Pyongyang
and to China.
He tweeted -- quote -- "North
Korea is looking
for trouble.
If China decides to help, that
would be great.
If not, we will solve the
problem without
them."
Democrats were hoping for an
upset today in
the first congressional election
since President
Trump's November victory.
It's a race to fill the Kansas
seat vacated
when Representative Mike Pompeo
was named
director of the CIA.
Democrat James Thompson is
challenging Republican
Ron Estes.
The president tweeted his
support for Estes
today.
The state of Texas must decide
how to proceed
after a federal judge ruled for
a second time
that a voter I.D. law
discriminates against
minorities.
In a previous ruling, the judge
likened the
law to a poll tax.
A federal appeals court asked
her to reexamine
the case, which she did, before
reaffirming
her finding on Monday.
A separate court has found that
Texas racially
gerrymandered several
congressional districts.
On Wall Street today, stocks
struggled to
make any headway.
The Dow Jones industrial average
gave up six
points to close at 20651.
The Nasdaq fell 14 points, and
the S&P 500
slipped three.
And in Thailand, they have begun
festivities
to ring in the Buddhist new
year, starting
with elephants spraying people
with water.
The animals marched through the
country's
ancient capital today, dousing
revelers and
tourists alike.
The tradition is said to wash
away bad luck
and usher in prosperity for the
new year.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
what happens
to the undocumented immigrants
after deportation;
why doctors now say men should
get screened
for prostate cancer;
corporations vs. consumers,
how airline ticket rules led to
this paying
customer being forced off a
United Airlines
flight; and much more.
Attorney General Jeff Sessions
today outlined
the Trump administration's tough
approach
on immigration during a visit to
the U.S.-Mexico
border in Nogales, Arizona.
He credited President Trump with
the decline
in border apprehensions and he
urged federal
prosecutors to focus on
smugglers and immigrants
who reenter the U.S. after
deportation.
JEFF SESSIONS, U.S. Attorney
General: For
those that continue to seek
improper and illegal
entry into this country, be
forewarned.
This is a new era.
This is the Trump era.
The lawlessness, the abdication
of the duty
to enforce our laws and the
catch-and-release
policies of the past are over.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And for more on
all of this,
we are joined from Tucson by
Nancy Montoya.
She's senior reporter on
immigration and border
issues for Arizona Public Media.
Nancy Montoya, welcome back to
the program.
You have been covering border
issues for many
years.
What struck you the most about
what the attorney
general had to say today?
NANCY MONTOYA, Arizona Public
Media: I think
it was more what he didn't say,
Judy.
One of the things that has been
happening
on a regular basis with the
Trump administration
is, officials come into the
border, they spend
a couple of hours, they talk to
CBP, which
is Customs and Border
Protection, they talk
to Border Patrol, they talk to
officials,
but they never talk to community
members,
to some of the civil rights
groups, to some
of the human rights groups who
have really
been protesting a lot of the
strategies and
policies of the Trump
administration.
So, that was one of the things
that really
caught me off-guard, is that
there was no
conversation with those on the
other side
of the controversy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What are you
hearing from this
administration that differs from
Obama administration
policy?
NANCY MONTOYA: I think it is the
types of
people who they are targeting
for deportation.
Under the Obama administration,
yes, it was
true he was dubbed the deporter
in chief for
deporting more people than the
past three
administrations put together,
but there was
also a targeted group they were
deporting,
Obama administration was
deporting.
And those were people with
felonies.
Those were people who were
involved in drug
trafficking, dangerous people,
people who
had committed murder or assault.
Those were the people who were
being targeted.
What's different here is that
you are now
considered illegal if you cross
the border
once, and you're considered to
have broken
the law.
So, one time will get you a
possible prosecution.
Two times where you're caught
crossing the
border illegally will get you a
felony.
And that's one of the biggest
differences.
Also, anybody who is caught up
in a net in
any kind of a raid are eligible
for deportation
immediately.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And there was
also -- we noticed
the march today seemed to be
addressed to
parents of children, parents who
had come
across the border, had children
born in the
U.S., but the vulnerability that
those parents
still find themselves in.
NANCY MONTOYA: Yes, that was
also one of the
things that struck me as
difficult to hear,
as someone who has lived and
worked along
the border for 30 years, is
that, in many
cases, you have people have
crossed the border
20, 30 years ago.
They had their children here.
They have grandchildren.
And now they, too, if they are
not citizens
and didn't cross into this
country legally,
they are subject to deportation.
And that has already happened,
where U.S.-born
children are being separated
from their parents.
Parents are being deported.
There is no safety net anymore.
And you are -- if you are here
and you cross
the border illegally, the Trump
administration
is putting you on warning that
you could be
next.
JUDY WOODRUFF: One of the things
the attorney
general, Nancy Montoya, referred
to was the
administration's plan to hire, I
think he
said 50 more immigration judges
this year,
75 more next year.
How much of a difference could
that make in
the processing of immigration
cases?
NANCY MONTOYA: That's very
unclear.
And there's actually two things
to consider
here.
First of all, the backlog with
immigration
court cases is about 500,000
people, half-a-million
people backlogged in the
immigration system.
It's unclear whether these 25 to
50 to 75
new judges will be handling only
the new cases
coming in, or will they be
spread out throughout
the entire system?
That's still unclear.
There is also a lot of worry
that you won't
get these judges up to speed.
I know that Attorney General
Sessions said
we're going to streamline the
process, we're
going to push people through,
but it still
takes up to a year to get a new
judge in place.
And we still have no evidence
that streamlining
is going to mean faster.
So, in the meantime, you will be
arresting
more people and putting more
people into the
system, more people into private
prisons and
some of the public prisons, and
further overloading
an already overwhelmed
immigration court system.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And just in a
couple seconds,
the status of the border wall
that we have
heard so much about?
NANCY MONTOYA: Border wall, no
go.
Mexico will not pay for it.
And Congress needs to
appropriate the money.
So far, they don't appear to be
willing to
do that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, we will
certainly see
about it.
Nancy Montoya with Arizona
Public Media, thank
you.
NANCY MONTOYA: Thank you, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, part of what
the attorney
general called the Trump era
includes speeding
up the deportation process, but
what happens
to those who are deported?
Special correspondent Nick
Schifrin traveled
to Mexico to try to answer that
question.
He begins in Mexico City.
NICK SCHIFRIN: In Mexico City's
airport, the
recently deported arrive by the
planeload.
This is the country of their
birth, but most
have been gone so long, it feels
foreign.
FELIZIO GONZALES, Recently
Deported (through
translator): You come back here
knowing nothing
about your future.
NICK SCHIFRIN:
Fifty-two-year-old Felizio
Gonzales was arrested last year
in Seattle
for running a stop sign.
He's been living in the U.S. as
an undocumented
immigrant installing carpets for
the last
20 years.
FELIZIO GONZALES (through
translator): I had
a girlfriend I was living with,
but now it's
all over.
She stayed there, and I came
back to Mexico.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Gonzales and
every deportee
arriving from the U.S. is
greeted by city
government workers and local aid
groups.
RUDY LOPEZ, Immigration
Activist: When you're
coming here, you're coming
broken.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Rudy Lopez leads
an organization
that provides basic immediate
assistance.
He says he feels recent
arrivals' pain.
He was deported for traffic
tickets and getting
in a fight a year-and-a-half
ago.
His two American children still
live in Las
Vegas.
RUDY LOPEZ: I fight because I
don't like families
being destroyed, you know?
I miss my boy.
I miss my daughter.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Is the government
helping recent
deportees?
RUDY LOPEZ: Really, really, it's
a little
bit, the help.
Our government is -- I'm sorry
for the word
-- it's (EXPLETIVE DELETED).
Mexico got a lot of money, but
not for everybody,
only for the government.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Today, Lopez is
the deportees'
only source of help.
He hands Gonzales a little
spending cash and
leads him outside the airport.
Gonzales carries only what U.S.
immigration
allowed him to take: a mesh bag,
the clothes
on his back.
They lead him into Mexico City's
sprawling
metro system.
Gonzales is almost immediately
lost.
He gets off the metro.
He hopes it's the right stop.
He looks for a bus to take him
an hour out
of town to his ex-wife's House,
but he hasn't
talked to her in four years.
He decides that she's a long
shot, and there
is only one remaining sanctuary.
FELIZIO GONZALES (through
translator): All
I can do is ask God to make it a
little easier.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Why can't you
help these people
more?
CARLOS SADA SOLANA, Mexican
Deputy Foreign
Minister: It's a huge challenge,
I would say.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Carlos Sada
Solana is Mexico's
deputy foreign minister.
He admits the government is
overwhelmed by
the recent arrivals.
CARLOS SADA SOLANA: We still
have to make
it better, so that people feel
really welcome
and protected by the
institutions of Mexico,
and also offering some
alternatives for jobs.
And that is what we are trying
to improve.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Many people here
blame President
Trump.
But his predecessor, President
Barack Obama,
was dubbed by his pro-immigrant
rights critics
the deporter-in-chief.
And according to Mexican
statistics, the Trump
administration deported slightly
fewer Mexicans
in February compared to last
year.
Mexico says what has changed is
that the Trump
administration is moving
undocumented Mexicans
through the deportation steps
faster, and
is deporting more undocumented
Mexicans from
cities far from the Mexican
border.
CARLOS SADA SOLANA: We are very
concerned,
because it has extended the
expedited removal,
not only from the border area,
to the whole
territory of the United States,
including
Alaska, and that this could
provoke also violations
of human rights, not giving the
due process
to the people.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Eleven hundred
miles north,
on the Arizona-Mexico border,
the two towns
divided by a fence are both
called Nogales.
The deportees in Nogales,
Mexico, arrive from
the U.S. by the busload.
The U.S. and Mexico coordinates
their arrival.
They have just a few days to
plan their next
steps.
JOSE MESA, Recently Deported:
This is my first
day over here in Mexico.
I feel, like, weird, because I
don't know
nothing about over here.
NICK SCHIFRIN: For the last 15
years, 29-year-old
Jose Mesa lived in Phoenix and
worked as a
caregiver.
He says he was arrested for
driving under
the influence, and then
deported.
Is there a lot of fear in
immigrant communities
in the United States about
getting deported
today?
JOSE MESA: Yes.
Basically, yes, they got a lot
of fear.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Because the
administration
doesn't want you?
JOSE MESA: Yes, administration
of Trump is
getting more worse, yes.
NICK SCHIFRIN: He says, since
the inauguration,
immigration agents are more
aggressive, and
his neighbors are more
prejudiced.
JOSE MESA: They don't give you
respect.
I mean, they treat me like
trash.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Nearby, the
deported find sanctuary
at the San Juan Bosco shelter.
This has been housing recent
arrivals for
more than 30 years.
Some will try and cross again.
But others are preparing to
travel south to
their homes in Mexico.
They say the border has gotten
too difficult
to cross.
Jorge Rivera Uribe is only 19.
His American dream was to
provide money for
his two sisters, his wife, his
daughter, and
his mother, who has diabetes.
JORGE RIVERA URIBE, Recently
Deported (through
translator): I don't have money
to take care
of them.
So, I wanted to see if I could
earn more money
to give them all a better life,
so they don't
have to suffer.
NICK SCHIFRIN: In the U.S., he
was building
homes, making in one day what it
takes a week
to make in Mexico.
But the border is now much more
dangerous.
Last month, he tried to sneak
into the U.S.
without paying the $500 charged
by local drug
cartels.
They almost beat him to death.
JORGE RIVERA URIBE (through
translator): They
told me, if they find me
crossing again, they
will blow my head off.
They don't know I'm alive.
If they did, they would have
come for me.
That's why I want to leave here.
I won't let them kill me.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Uribe and the
others are allowed
to spend three nights here.
It's comfortable, but they know
they need
to move on soon.
The next morning, they wait to
be transported
to other locations that offer
help.
Thirty-two-year-old Sergio
Guererro has four
American children in California.
What's changed for you since
Donald Trump
was elected president?
SERGIO GUERERRO, Recently
Deported (through
translator): It's gotten more
difficult.
If you go nowadays, it's
scarier.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Their reticence
reflects a
recent trend.
U.S. Border Patrol says, in
March, compared
to last year, the number of
people apprehended
or turned away at the border
dropped by 64
percent.
Homeland Security Secretary John
Kelly takes
credit for that decrease, and
says the administration's
policies discourage would-be
crossers.
JOHN KELLY, U.S. Homeland
Security Secretary:
What we're doing on the border,
what we intend
to do on the border has added to
that deterrent
effect.
NICK SCHIFRIN: But that has left
some of the
deported in no man's land, too
scared to try
and cross back to their American
lives, forsaken
by their birth country that
feels alien.
Martin Lopez is 48.
He was born in Tijuana, but
spent 44 years
in California.
He worked in restaurants and
says he paid
taxes.
He was deported three months ago
after he
says he took the rap for his
American wife's
welfare fraud.
MARTIN LOPEZ, Recently Deported:
I had to,
because I didn't want my kids
taken away from
her.
NICK SCHIFRIN: He left Mexico
when he was
4, and doesn't have his birth
certificate.
He never got any American
documentation.
He feels like a John Doe.
He's run out of money and hope.
MARTIN LOPEZ: It's difficult,
very difficult.
I never suffered this much like
I have in
a month, two months.
I mean, it comes down to the
point where you
just don't want to live no more.
That's all it is.
It's very difficult.
I have to survive, you know?
There's not much to say.
My kids hold me up.
NICK SCHIFRIN: You talk to them?
MARTIN LOPEZ: Oh, yes, I talk to
them.
NICK SCHIFRIN: What do they tell
you?
MARTIN LOPEZ: Oh, they say just
not to lose
hope, not to lose hope, and hang
in there.
But they're kids.
They don't -- there's not much
they can say.
NICK SCHIFRIN: When he first
arrived, he could
sleep and eat in local shelters.
But there's a time limit on
their assistance.
So, today, he's on his own.
He tried to cross back into the
U.S., but
fell and hurt his back.
He too turns to God.
He feels trapped between two
countries, neither
of which offers help.
MARTIN LOPEZ: Well, this is my
sleeping area.
Here is where I sleep ever since
I got deported.
And when I'm not working, I
mean, this is
where I'm at right here, as you
can see my
blankets here.
Not much of a comfort.
It's very sad, sleeping like
this.
You go through a lot of
thinking.
I don't have that support where
I can pay
and get across.
And I just think, for the next
day, how am
I going to make it, how am I
going to live,
what am I going to do?
Going to sleep with an empty
stomach, waking
up very sad.
NICK SCHIFRIN: He sleeps now
among the dead.
They are his neighbors of
necessity, and,
from them, despite everything
he's been through,
he takes resilience.
MARTIN LOPEZ: I will overcome
this.
I have to.
There's no life here, no life.
NICK SCHIFRIN: For the "PBS
NewsHour," I'm
Nick Schifrin in Nogales,
Mexico.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Each year, 26,000
men in the
United States die from prostate
cancer.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Each year, 26,000
men in the
United States die from prostate
cancer.
But there is confusion over
conflicting advice
about whom should get tested for
the disease.
There is new guidance out today
from an influential
task force.
Our William Brangham has that
story.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Here's where
some of the
confusion started.
Five years ago, the U.S.
Preventive Services
Task Force told men aged 55 and
over not to
undergo the common PSA test for
prostate cancer,
citing fears of overtreatment or
false positives.
But, today, that panel reversed
course, saying
that men 55 to 69 should
consider the test,
but that men 70 and over should
still skip
it.
I'm joined now by the doctor who
chairs that
task force.
Dr. Kirsten Bibbins-Domingo is
an general
internist at U.C.
San Francisco.
Welcome to the "NewsHour."
DR.
KIRSTEN BIBBINS-DOMINGO, U.S.
Preventive Services
Task Force: Thank you for having
me.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So, forgive my
sense of
whiplash here, but help me
understand, what
is the task force recommending
today?
What's the evidence behind your
recommendation?
DR.
KIRSTEN BIBBINS-DOMINGO: The
task force is
recommending that men between
the ages of
55 and 69 have a conversation
with their doctor
about prostate cancer screening.
We want men to know about the
benefits of
screening.
We want them to also be aware of
the harms
that might occur along the along
the way during
the process of screening.
The key here is that men should
have this
discussion.
They should be aware the
benefits and harms
and then make the right decision
that's right
for them.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Well, what
would be the
harms?
I can understand the benefits.
They can find out whether you
have cancer
or not, but what are the harms
involved?
DR.
KIRSTEN BIBBINS-DOMINGO: The
challenge with
prostate cancer screening is the
test that
we use, the PSA test, is not
that good for
distinguishing the types of
cancers that are
going to cause problems, the
aggressive cancers,
distinguishing those from those
that are slow-growing
and may not cause a man a
problem during his
lifetime.
And since most men who get
diagnosed end up
getting treated, those men are
then subjected
to the harms of treatment, which
are important,
and include impotence and
incontinence, harms
that happen in most men.
We're fortunate that the task
force has new
evidence.
We have new evidence that led to
the change
in our grade.
And the new evidence is both
about the benefits,
but also about approaches that
can be used
to allow some men to reduce some
of these
harms.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So, let's just
say I'm one
of these men, I get the test,
and the PSA
test indicates that I have
cancer.
What's next?
DR.
KIRSTEN BIBBINS-DOMINGO: So,
after the PSA
test, you would have to have a
prostate biopsy.
That's what would be important
for us to really
determine whether you have
cancer.
The strategy called active
surveillance was
one of those new strategies that
we reviewed
evidence for in the update.
If you have low-risk prostate
cancer, this
might allow you to -- active
surveillance
might allow you to avoid or
delay treatment,
because we watch you over time
to see if the
cancer is progressing, and only
treat those
men whose cancer is progressing.
And so that was what allowed us
to say that,
for some men, the harms might be
reduced.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So, if I
understand correctly,
the new evidence that has helped
you change
your minds was that this testing
saves more
lives than it hurts in these
ancillary side
effects?
DR.
KIRSTEN BIBBINS-DOMINGO: Well, I
think the
most important thing to say is
that there
are benefits and there are
harms, and what
that balance looks like for any
given man
depends on how he values those
benefits and
harms.
So, some men might say, I want
to reduce my
chance of dying of prostate
cancer no matter
what.
I don't care about the risks
that you're talking
about.
Let's go ahead.
There are other men who might
say, the likelihood
of benefiting from screening is
so small.
It's only about one or two men
in 1,000 screened
who actually are prevented from
dying.
That man might say, that
likelihood is too
low, and I'm not willing to be
-- to subject
myself to the potential risks
associated with
screening.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: And there's a
lot of urologists
-- and I know the American
cancer society
has come out.
They are very happy with your
new guidelines.
There are other doctors who have
said this
is a complicated conversation
that you're
asking people to have with their
doctors,
doctors don't have a lot of time
to talk their
patients, and that they worry
that these guidelines
will be blanket everybody get a
PSA test,
and that then we will see all of
these negative
side effects.
How do you weigh that concern?
DR.
KIRSTEN BIBBINS-DOMINGO: Well,
it's definitely
true that these are complex
discussions.
These are complex decisions.
We do think that every man
deserves to really
understand what the science is
telling them.
And that's why we really
emphasize that these
discussions are important ones
to be had between
doctors and patients to really
understand,
for any given man, what is the
right choice
for him?
We are happy that many have
engaged in the
conversation.
And it's rally important that we
get the right
input and have the discussion
about our draft
recommendation.
But, in the end, the most
important thing
for a given man is that he is
aware that the
science is telling us about
benefits and harms,
and that he uses that together
to make the
right decision for himself.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So, the
recommendations
are, 55 to 69, strongly consider
the test,
talk to your doctor about it,
men over 70,
not necessary.
What about younger men under 55?
DR.
KIRSTEN BIBBINS-DOMINGO: So,
there are definite
gaps in our evidence right now.
We'd like to have better
research about the
types of tests that we could use
to screen
for prostate cancer.
I told you PSA test is not a
great test.
We'd like to have more research
on high-risk
men.
We know that African-American
men have higher
risks of prostate cancer.
So do men with a family history.
A lot of times, these are the
types of cancer
that occur in men earlier in
life.
We just don't have enough
evidence about how
we can screen those men
effectively, what's
the best age to start, how often
to screen.
We really need evidence for
these men.
In the absence of that evidence,
I would say
that our recommendations
definitely apply
to these high-risk men.
That's important to get out
there.
But we also need more research.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: All right, Dr.
Kirsten Bibbins-Domingo,
thank you very much.
DR.
KIRSTEN BIBBINS-DOMINGO: Thank
you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": a
generation
torn out of school by the Syrian
civil war;
a bat-killing disease that's
spread across
the entire country; and making
art out of
breaking news.
But first: The international
uproar continued
over the forced removal of a
passenger from
a United Airlines flight.
Today, the airline's CEO, Oscar
Munoz, issued
an apology, saying -- quote --
"No one should
ever be mistreated this way.
I want you to know that we take
full responsibility,
and we will work to make it
right."
Along with the outrage, many
were asking,
how could this happen?
Our Jeffrey Brown picks up the
story.
JEFFREY BROWN: Well, by now, the
video has
been watched hundreds of
millions of times,
including more than 270 million
on social
media in China, where many
wondered if the
passenger had been singled out
because he
is of Asian descent.
The cell phone video shows a
bloodied man
identified as Dr. David Dao
being pulled from
his seat on a plane set to
depart from Chicago
on Sunday night.
The flight was sold out, and
passengers were
first offered vouchers to take
another flight,
so members of a United crew
could board.
When that didn't work, Dao and
three other
passengers were asked to leave.
Questions remain about what
happened, and
what's supposed to happen in a
situation like
this.
Ben Mutzabaugh is covering it
for USA Today,
and joins me now.
And welcome to you.
BEN MUTZABAUGH, USA Today:
Thanks for having
me.
JEFFREY BROWN: One thing that
was clarified
today was that the flight was
actually not
overbooked, but oversold, right,
sold out?
BEN MUTZABAUGH: Right.
That's correct.
So, it won't move the needle a
whole lot,
given the video that we saw, but
what technically
happened was, the plane was
full.
United had four employees of
their affiliate
Republic Airlines that needed to
make it to
Louisville so more flights
didn't end up getting
canceled down the line.
They had to make space for them.
They needed four volunteers.
Three were OK with being
voluntarily kicked
off the plane.
One wasn't, and here we are.
JEFFREY BROWN: And, as we heard,
the CEO,
Munoz, gave an apology today,
after huge criticism
for not apologizing sufficiently
up to this
point.
This is a -- this is a mess for
United, right?
BEN MUTZABAUGH: This has really,
really spiraled
out of control.
And I think the apology today
was probably
helpful.
It certainly sounded more
sincere than the
one that we got yesterday.
And it also came after the
internal memo that
pretty much said employees had
done things
the right way.
And even if that's true, you
can't see that
video and have that go over well
with what
you hear.
They are facing a full-fledged,
all-out public
relations crisis at a time when
they're really
trying to change the perception
of the airline.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, everybody
watching this,
everybody who flies is
wondering, what kind
of rules apply or should apply
in a case like
this?
So, it's very common these days
that flights
are overbooked, right?
That's the way the airlines
operate.
What rules apply?
BEN MUTZABAUGH: So, the
government says airlines
can overbook flights.
They can sell more seats than
there are on
the plane.
They have to inform you of your
rights, and
then they have the call for
volunteers.
Now, if that doesn't happen, the
airlines
can remove passengers based on a
list of criteria.
The only thing the government
really requires
in the scenario is for the
airlines to inform
passengers of their rights and
to get a written
copy of the rules, which
basically list the
criteria that they will use to
choose people
to leave the flight.
And they set compensation levels
that pretty
much top out, if you get to a
domestic destination
more than two hours late, you
will get 400
percent of your one-way ticket
for that flight
or a maximum of $1,350.
JEFFREY BROWN: Well, but it if
comes to that,
where they really need -- first
of all, they
offer the vouchers we're all
familiar with,
right, try to lure people to
take...
BEN MUTZABAUGH: Right, yes,
start at $200,
go to $300, and keep raising.
JEFFREY BROWN: Right.
And in this case, I understand
United was
offering up to $1,000 to get
people to...
BEN MUTZABAUGH: Definitely $800.
We have seen some reports --
there are so
many -- watching this spiral out
of control,
it's amazing to see all the
stories that have
surfaced on social media, which
is probably
part of the problem for United.
But, yes, they offered $800,
$1,000.
No takers, until they got to the
last four.
And then they just couldn't --
should have
raised it more perhaps.
JEFFREY BROWN: Well, so, when it
gets to this
next stage where they are asking
people to
leave, do we know -- you're
saying every airline
has its own criteria?
How do they decide on who
they're going to
ask to get up and go?
BEN MUTZABAUGH: It's generally a
combination
of frequent flyer status, the
fare paid, lowest
fare paid.
The cynics will say that if you
boot the person
who paid the lowest fare, that
the least amount
of compensation you will owe
them under the
federal regulations on dumping
about what
you would owe them.
So it stands to reason you might
bump passengers
who have paid the lowest fare.
Other things can include the
last ones to
check in.
There is really a list of
factors.
But perhaps -- perhaps what
makes this so
troubling for the airlines, and
especially
in a situation like this, is
that, although
it's somewhat transparent, it's
not completely
transparent.
You get a list of factors, but
not a hard-and-fast
checklist.
JEFFREY BROWN: Right.
And then if you want to -- if
you want to
say no, as Dr. Dao does -- did,
do passengers
have any rights to say no?
BEN MUTZABAUGH: They do not.
And this is where this
particular situation,
I think, really went off the
rails.
So, United probably, in my
opinion, should
have done more to entice him or
someone else
to get off the plane, because,
once you turn
this situation over to the
authorities, you
have got an airline that says
you have to
get off the plane, you have got
a passenger
who says, I'm not getting off
the plane.
If you call authorities then,
there is pretty
much only one way that turns
out.
And that's what we saw in the
video.
Now, admittedly, that video
turned out probably
much worse than anyone would
have anticipated.
But if they could have done
anything and got
Mr. Dao off the plane, this
becomes a local
-- not even a local story in
Louisville, and
we're not talking about it
today.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, just in our
last 30 seconds
here, I mean, people still book
mostly based
on price and convenience, right?
BEN MUTZABAUGH: That's right.
JEFFREY BROWN: How much brand
loyalty is there?
How much lasting impact would
you expect this
to have?
BEN MUTZABAUGH: There are
frequent flyers
who will stick with an airline
no matter what.
But what we have seen for the
public at large,
people who are infrequent
flyers, no matter
how big the scandal, no matter
how big the
crisis, no matter how poor the
reputation,
passengers have shown time and
time again
they will book the fare that's
$199, instead
of $200, no matter what.
Now, it remains to be -- this
has turned into
a pretty big situation for
United.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes, this is
unusual, right?
This is not good attention for
United.
BEN MUTZABAUGH: This will test
that.
Exactly.
This will test that.
But the precedent says people
will come back
if the fares are lower.
JEFFREY BROWN: OK.
They will be watching carefully.
BEN MUTZABAUGH: Exactly.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right, Ben
Mutzabaugh of
USA Today, thank you very much.
BEN MUTZABAUGH: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: White-nose
syndrome is a disease
that has been killing millions
of bats across
the Northeastern U.S. since
2006.
Last year, the disease
mysteriously appeared
in the Seattle area.
As Michael Werner from Public
Media's EarthFix
desk reports, researchers are
racing to learn
what West Coast bats are in for.
MICHAEL WERNER: Wildlife
veterinarian John
Huckabee is on the lookout for
symptoms of
a deadly and contagious disease,
a disease
that kills bats by the millions.
DR.
JOHN HUCKABEE, PAWS Wildlife
Center: There
are a few small deep pigmented
areas of scarring,
but, overall, looks like he's in
very good
shape.
MICHAEL WERNER: This
silver-haired bat doesn't
seem to be a carrier.
But, a few months ago, a little
brown bat
arrived at his office outside
Seattle.
JOHN HUCKABEE: I saw that one of
the wings
had a lot of contracture and
some wounds,
some lesions on the wing, and it
had an appearance
that it may have a fungal
infection.
MICHAEL WERNER: The odd scarring
was a possible
sign of white-nose syndrome, one
of the deadliest
wildlife diseases in modern
times.
First discovered in New York
state in 2006,
white-nose syndrome has killed
more than 5.5
million bats and counting.
The disease, which is spread
primarily by
bat-to-bat contact, has wreaked
havoc on the
large colonies of the East
Coast.
JEREMY COLEMAN, U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service:
We have seen populations of bats
in eastern
colonies decline, in some cases,
to 100 percent.
MICHAEL WERNER: Until recently,
it wasn't
known how the disease killed its
victims,
but new research suggests that
bats with white-nose
wake up more often during
hibernation.
This causes them to burn through
fat reserves
that would usually sustain them
through the
winter.
Starvation and death soon
follow.
In just a few short years, the
epidemic raced
across the country, spreading
from the Northeast
all the way to Nebraska and
Oklahoma.
But then it hit an enormous
natural barrier.
The Rocky Mountains kept the
disease from
reaching Western bats, or so
scientists thought,
until Huckabee's discovery.
Some speculate that an infected
bat may have
hitched a ride on a freight
truck.
Others think hikers or cavers
may have unwittingly
carried the fungus on their
clothes or equipment.
Since the first infected bat was
found in
the forests east of Seattle, the
white-nose
fungus has been found twice more
in Washington
state, both near the original
site around
North Bend.
WOMAN: We have bats in the net.
MICHAEL WERNER: Fear of a
white-nose outbreak
has jump-started research, not
just in Washington,
but around the Northwest.
In Central Oregon, ecologist Tom
Rodhouse
and a team of researchers are
collecting data
on local bats.
TOM RODHOUSE, National Park
Service: Bats
hang out in the dark.
They hang out in these big
cliffs and crevices
that we can't access.
So, we have gone for decades
without really
understanding what's happening
with bats.
MICHAEL WERNER: They're trying
to assess the
health and population size of
Oregon's 15
species of bats.
TOM RODHOUSE: There's really no
way for us
to ascertain what's happening
with our bat
populations without this kind of
a coordinated
large-scale survey effort.
MICHAEL WERNER: Back in
Washington, researchers
such as Abby Tobin are trying to
learn how
bats spend their winters.
ABBY TOBIN, Researcher: We're
trying to figure
out what type of habitats
they're roosting
in, if they're hibernating
through the winter,
or if they are kind of active
throughout,
and also looking at those
habitats they're
using, and whether the
environment there is
conducive for the fungus to
thrive.
Why don't we kind of go down a
little bit
and see away from the trail?
MICHAEL WERNER: She's setting up
bat detectors,
specialized microphones that can
pick up bats'
high-frequency calls.
ABBY TOBIN: Each bat has a
unique echolocation
call, and so we're able to
identify them based
on that call from those acoustic
detectors.
From this, I could tell this is
canyon bat.
And they have this typical kind
of hockey
stick shape look to their claw.
MICHAEL WERNER: In the lab,
Tobin looks for
small signs the disease is
taking hold in
Washington.
ABBY TOBIN: And there's a couple
little tiny
little holes.
I am looking right now to see if
there is
any damage to the wing
membranes, which would
be a sign that it had white-nose
syndrome.
It's important to detect
white-nose syndrome
early because it allows us to
get a sense
of where it is, and so we might
be able to
do some sort of containment or
treatment with
the animals.
MICHAEL WERNER: Despite
white-nose's deadly
effects on bats, it poses no
known threat
to people.
But many questions remain.
And it could be years before
definitive answers
emerge.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Michael Werner
in Seattle.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And a postscript:
High school
students at our Student
Reporting Lab outside
of Louisville, Kentucky,
produced a story
on the effect of white-nose
syndrome on bats
at Mammoth Cave National Park.
You can find that report on
studentreportinglabs.org.
Let's return to the war in
Syria, and focus
on the effect it is having on
children.
The schools have been
devastated.
More than a third have closed
since the war
began.
And a recent report by the
International Rescue
Committee found more than 1.7
million children
and youth are not attending
classes.
That is the focus of our weekly
segment Making
the Grade.
And we're joined by David
Miliband the president
of the International Rescue
Committee.
He recently visited the region
and refugee
children in Lebanon.
David Miliband, welcome back to
the program.
We know this war has taken a
terrible toll
on lives in so many ways, but
what is the
main finding of your report on
the effect
on children and their ability to
learn?
DAVID MILIBAND, President,
International Rescue
Committee: Thank you, Judy.
Well, the situation inside Syria
is obviously
top of the news because of the
crushing and
appalling chemical weapons
attacks last week.
But the long-term impact of six
years of war
on about 1.7 million children
inside the country
who are being denied education
is obviously
very grave indeed.
There is the fundamental stress,
what is called
the toxic stress, of being
involved in a war.
And for those inside the
country, they're
denied the most basic access to
education.
Obviously, that problem is
doubled by the
experience of the refugees who
are out of
the country, 5.5 million
refugees out of the
country, half of them kids,
probably half
of those not getting an
education at all.
So, it is true to talk about a
generation
of Syrian schoolchildren being
denied the
most basic elements of an
education.
And, of course, that stands in
stark contrast
to the fact that they would have
expected,
in a middle-income country,
which Syria was
before 2011, to get a decent
education.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What does this
mean?
Based on this report that the
International
Rescue Committee has put
together, what does
this mean specifically in terms
of children's
literacy, their ability to read,
their ability
to do basic math?
DAVID MILIBAND: Well, we found
that children
in grades six, seven, eight, so
children almost
approaching teenage years, were
unable to
do the kind of sums or spelling
that you would
expect from a grade one student.
So, that's what six years of
education being
lost means, never mind the huge
blow to the
children's understanding and
self-esteem that
comes from seeing their country
blown apart,
and often their families blown
apart as well.
And so I think that the message
I would get
across to your viewers is that
the toll on
children is almost greater than
on any other
group.
But, secondly, never
underestimate the resilience
of the children and the ability
of them, when
given proper educational
provision, to bounce
back.
We, the International Rescue
Committee, offer
education in the north of Syria
to children
inside the country.
We also offer education in the
neighboring
states.
And what we find is that,
however hard the
children have been hit, there's
a remarkable
capacity to bounce back, if
they're given
proper help.
And that makes international
humanitarian
aid especially important.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, what is
proper help?
What does that consist of?
And what can be done about this?
Because people are certainly
looking for ways
out of this war, but, if
anything, that looks
harder than ever today.
DAVID MILIBAND: You're right
about the huge
diplomatic effort that's going
to be necessary.
But, on the humanitarian front,
and especially
the educational front, there are
two things
that are essential.
First of all, there's no point
in pretending
that kids who have been through
a war are
like any other first grader or
fifth grader
turning up for school.
They need proper attention to
their social
and emotional resources.
What's called the toxic stress
that they have
suffered is effectively brain
damage and/or
what would be called amongst
adults PTSD.
And these children need to have
that addressed
before they're able to access
learning.
However, in addition to those
social and emotional
skills and resources that they
need to build
up, they also need the basic
elements of an
education.
And our argument is that, at a
time when the
overall humanitarian budget is
under huge
stress, at a time when less than
2 percent
of the global humanitarian
budget is spent
on education, that is the worst
possible time
for the administration in
Washington to be
talking about one-third cuts, 31
percent cuts
in America's contribution to
humanitarian
aid, because America has often
marked itself
out for its commitment on the
humanitarian
front.
And those children in Syria who
we surveyed,
they need America's help.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you're saying
there's a
direct link between what the
U.S. does in
terms of foreign aid and the
long-term repercussions,
survival of these children, and
their ability
to be functioning human beings?
DAVID MILIBAND: Well, you don't
need to just
take my word for it.
I lead a humanitarian
organization, so you
might expect me to say that
humanitarian aid
is important.
But just listen to the U.S.
defense secretary,
Secretary Mattis.
He's very clear, as a military
man, that military
effort on its own, it needs to
be -- is not
enough on its own.
It needs to be allied obviously
to diplomatic
effort, but also to humanitarian
and development
efforts as well.
And those three aspects of
American foreign
policy, the military, the
diplomacy and the
humanitarian development, need
to go together.
And so the suggestion from the
administration
that now is the time to slash
America's leadership
on humanitarian aid seems
extremely misguided.
We're living through the world's
-- certainly
this century's worst civil war
in Syria.
We know there are four famines
that are hitting
parts of Africa.
The global refugee crisis is at
its height.
Humanitarian aid is an essential
commitment
to the future of those children,
but it's
also a stabilizer of the
societies from which
they come.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, you
mentioned the defense
secretary, James Mattis.
In fact, he said at his news
conference today
that the U.S. -- it sounded as
if what he
was saying was that, unless
there is another
chemical weapons attack by the
Assad regime,
at this point, the U.S. has no
further plan
to intervene militarily.
What does that mean for the
efforts of groups
like the International Rescue
Committee?
DAVID MILIBAND: Well, we can
report from the
ground that our staff -- I have
got about
1,400 staff working for the
International
Rescue Committee inside Syria.
They rushed towards that
chemical weapons
attack in an ambulance.
They rescued 10 people, took
them to a hospital
in Idlib, and saved their lives.
But, obviously, they are in fear
not just
of chemical weapons attacks, but
conventional
weapons attacks as well.
And so my message from the
ground would be
that we -- it's incumbent on
American political
leadership to make stop the
killing the central
demand that is made of all the
actors in the
conflict.
Until we stop the killing, then
not only will
the humanitarian situation get
worse, but
the prospects for any kind of
durable peace
evaporate as well.
And my fear from the ground is
that, in the
few days since the chemical
weapons attacks,
there's actually been an
intensification of
the conventional weapons
warfare.
And that's obviously cold
comfort to anyone
on the ground trying to live
their life inside
Syria.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But it was clear
today, again,
just quickly, in listening to
Secretary Mattis,
that the administration is right
now drawing
a line between responding if
there is a chemical
weapons attack, but something
very different
if it's short of, even if it's
barrel bombs
on civilians.
DAVID MILIBAND: Well, obviously,
as a leader
of a humanitarian organization,
it's not for
me to advocate one military
tactic or another.
What I can say is that the
situation on the
ground is grave and getting
worse, that the
cease-fires that are being
proclaimed at various
points haven't held at all, and
that, with
500,000 dead, 5.5 million
refugees, it's well
past the time when Syria wasn't
just a humanitarian
emergency, but it was a
political emergency
as well.
It's a source of massive
instability across
the Middle East and into Europe.
And that calls for the highest
levels of diplomatic
and political engagement.
JUDY WOODRUFF: David Miliband,
the president
of the International Rescue
Committee, thank
you.
DAVID MILIBAND: Thank you so
much.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally tonight:
A museum exhibition
explores a different way of
covering the news
through art.
Jeffrey Brown is back with the
story from
a recent trip to Los Angeles.
JEFFREY BROWN: Twenty-four-hour
news channels,
digital news feeds, the latest
tweet, it's
the now-familiar, nonstop,
sometimes overwhelming
world of news and information we
live in.
But that sense of news
bombardment isn't really
new, and an exhibition at the
Getty Museum
in Los Angeles shows how artists
have often
commented on, wrestled and
played with it.
Curator Arpad Kovacs:
ARPAD KOVACS, Curator, J. Paul
Getty Museum:
Most of us just don't know how
to make sense
of it.
And I think that's where artists
step in and
are able to kind of make
something fruitful
and sort of thoughtful, and take
the images,
take the text, take the
information as source
material to make something that
looks critically
at the information that we
receive every single
day.
JEFFREY BROWN: The exhibition,
titled Breaking
News, takes us to a pre-Internet
era, featuring
work by artists often seeking
political, as
well as aesthetic expression.
For Martha Rosler, the starting
point was
"LIFE" magazine as a guide to
the American
psyche.
As the Vietnam War raged, the
magazine captured
the war in photographs.
But turn the page to sumptuous
home interiors.
Rosler put the two together, in
one photo,
Pat Nixon in the White House,
with the image
of a war victim over the
fireplace.
ARPAD KOVACS: She's making this
juxtaposition,
bringing these two disparate
images together,
in an effort to show how we can
sometimes
be oblivious to what's happening
in this world.
DONALD BLUMBERG, Artist: This
stuff is from
'70-'72.
JEFFREY BROWN: Artist Donald
Blumberg also
sought to transform a news
medium into a work
of art, one that says something
about the
times.
He took images from newspaper
stories about
slain soldiers or war
atrocities.
DONALD BLUMBERG: And I
re-photographed them,
and I wanted to enlarge them to
a size that
was inescapable for the viewer
to pass.
And it was intended to be a
direct political
act against the war in Vietnam.
That's what it was intended to
do.
JEFFREY BROWN: By saying, look
hard at these
photographs that sort of appear.
DONALD BLUMBERG: Look hard.
You can't escape it.
JEFFREY BROWN: He also began
photographing
his television set, freezing in
time major
historical events.
His first work captured images
from the funeral
of Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.
DONALD BLUMBERG: It was a way of
creating
a reportage to photograph off
the television
and translate it into a mosaic,
a mosaic in
which a person could look at the
whole story
and break it up into little
fragments, one
cell, two cell, horizontally,
diagonally.
JEFFREY BROWN: Then there's a
kind of strange
news poem created by Omer Fast
in the wake
of the 9/11 attacks.
He took single words spoken by
CNN anchors
and reporters.
You will certainly recognize one
of them.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The standard of
reporting.
JEFFREY BROWN: To fashion a
piece about fear
and anxiety.
Robert Heinecken played with
news anchors
in a different way, as a kind of
commodity,
in his piece, Case Study in
Finding An Appropriate
Newswoman.
He used photos of newscasters
and combined
them into an idealized
co-anchor.
ARPAD KOVACS: I think what he
was interested
in is trying to reveal all of
the complex
decisions that go into making
such a choice
that the general public is not
aware of.
Here, we have five panels in
which he's reproduced
issues of "LIFE" magazine.
JEFFREY BROWN: For some artists,
the subject
was what's left out, what's not
there.
Chilean artist Alfredo Jaar
created this large-scale
five-panel piece with every
cover of "LIFE"
magazine.
In a kind of "Where's Waldo?"
style, he called it Searching
for Africa in
Life.
ARPAD KOVACS: When you look at
this work,
you realize that there are very
few instances
where the continent of Africa is
represented.
And in many of those instances,
it's actually
rather ambiguous whether the
cover pertains
to a story that deals with
Africa.
JEFFREY BROWN: The news as art,
the art of
the news.
The exhibition Breaking News is
at the Getty
through April.
From Los Angeles, I'm Jeffrey
Brown for the
"PBS NewsHour."
JUDY WOODRUFF: And for the
record, the Getty
Foundation helps to underwrite
the "NewsHour."
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow
evening.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and we will see you soon.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and we will see you soon.